right after 9/11 I had an immediate
shift in my thinking I really grappled
with what did it mean to be an artist
during wartime is it impossible to
understand so a civilian back home and a
frontline war experience is it
impossible to bridge that gap I wanted
at least to explore it through art what
we're really interested in is less about
you know how a sixty millimeter mortar
works or what are the effects of bombs
on a major European city it's more about
your personal experience and especially
those of you who were in the
rank-and-file charlotte's paid it was a
combat nurse in Vietnam experiencing a
great many traumatic things in fact much
more than many soldiers ever see part of
the conversation here is about how this
affects families it's not just the
veterans themselves Jeanne that's why I
wanted you to come as well you know Bob
you've been living with these dreams for
a long time Bob served in Korea and then
my queering who was flew 35 missions 34
missions over Germany maybe 17 as a
waist gunner on your 34th mission was
when you were terribly wounded
everybody had a first-aid kit and of
course then they injected me with
morphine or whatever we had and see and
just patch me up you know as much as
they could but what they were patching
up was my leg not my stomach they
couldn't see that and when we got back
in why they shoot the red flares and
your bomber his first call because
that's notification there's wounded yeah
but did it seem like forever
I can't imagine because you come back on
three engines
I've stumbled on this picture and my
research that said everything I was
trying to say in this whole ten years at
work and it was it was an image from
World War one the soldier in a trench
and he was sitting there in the mud with
one small tomato plant growing right
next to him in the dirt all around him
were his comrades it was very clear you
could see their uniforms or even in one
case a shoe still sticking out of the
ground and there's just no mistaking
what he knew there fully what he was
doing and this strange process of trying
to grow something on top of that soil
for his own survival so this piece is
driven by those ideas reminded me of
where I was in the hooch that I lived in
was very muddy and there was no there
was no grass and it was pretty bad and
actually a couple of us decided to plant
flowers and we planted some marigolds
and we were all in this hard clay and
then it would be mud and slush and but
there were at the end of part our
struggle of planting them and watching
them grow and all that they were like
maybe three or four little marigolds
that came out of the hole back no I did
not know because because I I found two
that like that would be a defiant but I
mean that fits the definition yes it's
great but as a tradition even amongst
military personnel don't seem to be
connected from one war to another that
that has been this connection which
maybe again that's the role of a
historian or an artist and I have the
saying of mine that I can't touch a
material until I've earned its respect
and so you know when you're holding
shrapnel or locket of hair from the
Civil War soldier everything I used I
used with the most respect I could
muster and the most thorough groundwork
is on the historical side of it would
you live here what our family
he's felt while we were there you know
you're not rewriting history to your
view you are writing history the way
that damn thing happened I think for me
what you're saying is something that we
as soldiers didn't hear enough that the
pain of the homefront was in its own way
just as serious and just as difficult on
our brothers and sisters mothers
girlfriends fathers in the face but
there's always life that creeps out
around the tomato plant poppies on a
grave and I think that holistic coach
speaking is what you're saying the good
things will come even though there was
terrible things there and that that to
me speaks a lot I mean I was never in a
war but he was and there are times that
he feels guilty that he came back and
others didn't but life goes on we had
eight children it goes on you know it's
it is open-ended it'll keep going and
now remember don't remember
you